Royal Holloway, University of London\
jordy.gennissen@rhul.ac.uk

Background
==========

*This is on the why and not the how, so feel free to skip this if you’re
convinced.*\

A lot can be concluded by looking at code, whether it’s source code or a
compiled, binary representation. However, when compiling, higher level
semantics get lost in the translation from source code towards binary
code (or rather assembly code). Moreover, binary code changes
drastically when using a different cpu-family or operating system, a
different compiler or even a different version of the same compiler. In
spite of this, the resulting executable should produce the same result
(and usually does).

Hence, automatically analysing this assembly code is a very complex and
error-prone task, because one approach might not work on the next
version of the same compiler. Yet, the source code might not always be
available when analysing an executable. On top of this, source code is
easy to understand but is not the code that is executed in the end. In
other words, it is very useful to be able to reason about the executed
code and its assembly representation.

To do this, we chose to use a computer science approach that is well
known: regular expressions. Regular expressions are a powerful tool and
widely used to match all kinds of patterns: email address format, file
format checks, matching an IP address or grabbing html tags to name a
few. Besides, regular expressions are well-studied and so are their
limitations. Matching assembly code patterns using regular expressions
almost becomes natural.

In conclusion, is an approach to create a more robust detection of
patterns in assembly code, by using the power of regular expressions
combined with a solid and versatile framework that can be extended to
compare any requirements one may need on assembly code. However, the
real strength for this tool is to write es yourself, as the entire tool
relies on the strength of the expression.

Assembly RegEx
==============

As mentioned, the regular expressions to write resemble regular
expressions, with the main difference to use “assembly instruction
placeholders” instead of a normal RegEx. These placeholders are
described in more detail later in this document. A typical assembly
instruction placeholder looks as follows:

From here onwards, matching is done like your regular regular
expression. For example, to match a potential if-statement like this

A good candidate expression would be

It might just do the trick. However this pattern is not very versatile
yet and can be heavily improved. Take a look at the next attempt:

Due to limitations of regular expressions, matching the exact
destination register of the mov instruction to one of the arguments of
cmp is (theoretically) impossible, but having a maximum of 5
instructions in between makes it likely to be the if-statement.

Design choices
--------------

The system differs from the “regular regular expressions” in a couple of
ways.

### Non Greedy Matching

By default, it will match every (sub)pattern in a lazy way (as opposed
to greedy). This will mean that will try to match first, will try to
match next, and so on (to be changed by setting the static variable to
). In case a greedy match is preferred, one can add a capital G in front
of the repetition statement of the pattern string. Thus, will try to
match as many \<a\>’s as possible before matching a \<b\>. Similarly,
when the default is reset to be greedy, a (sub)pattern can be set to
lazy by adding the capital L.

The greediness of (sub)patterns is particularly important in the design
when using the current , because of the following design.

### Match Starts

The AsmRegEx system will try to match from the first assembly
instruction onwards. When an instruction while matching turns out to be
a jmp, the next instruction to match will be the instruction where the
unconditional jump points to.

In the usual case that nothing matches from the given pointer, it will
change it’s start for matching towards the next assembly instruction and
so on. This does not jump on a jmp instruction. However, when a match is
found:

-   The matcher will stop it’s current search for this start pointer,
    deleting all unexplored states for matching, and,

-   [lastinstrmatch]the matcher will continue at the assembly
    instruction after the last-matched instruction

These will filter out many duplicates and partial duplicates when
matching complex expressions. However, if the match includes any
backwards “jump” instruction, *this can generate an infinite loop*.

### Non Greedy Parsing

As the name suggest, parsing in general is supposed to be non greedy or
lazy within the . This currently means that repetition matching is done
as in most RegEx systems (“ab\*” is equivalent to “a(b\*)” and not
“(ab)\*”). However, this differs from most RegEx or statements, where
“ab|c” in ** is equivalent to “a(b|c)” and not to “(ab)|c”. This is in
contrast to most general RegEx systems.\

The next section will go into more depth on the assembly placeholder
syntax and power.

Assembly placeholder syntax
===========================

The assembly tag or placeholder defines a pattern to match to one single
assembly instruction. It always starts with a “less than” sign and
always ends with a “greater than” sign, analogous to html tags. Inside
the tag, various conditions reside, delimited with a comma.

A full tag is defined as follows:

arg1 and arg2 are optional (and may even be non-existent in the assembly
instruction). opcode and options are however mandatory. Hence, every tag
must contain at least one comma. As of yet, no additional options are
implemented yet. This means that every tag **must** end with \`\`,\>’.

Opcodes
-------

The opcode placeholder should currently be a list of opcodes, delimited
with a dot. Some additional and non-existent opcodes have been added in
capitals, defining a standard range of opcodes. These special ones are
defined in table [opcodetable].

  [opcodetable] opcode   Resulting range
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  any                    Any instruction
  JC                     Any conditional jump (regex(’j+’) but not jmp)
  JS                     Jumps on single conditions (je, jne, jz)
  ALU                    Any ALU calculation instruction (add, sub, inc, dec, and, (x)or, not, (i)mul, (i)div)
  SS                     Any ALU shift (shl, sal, hsr, sar)
  RR                     Any ALU rotate (rol, rcl, ror, rcr)
  FL                     Any unconditional flag set (stc, cls, cmc, std, cld, sti, cli)
  PU                     Any push instruction (push, pusha, pushf)
  PO                     Any pop instruction (pop, popa, popf)
  PP                     Any push or pop instruction ( PU | PO )

Apart from these additional ranges of instructions, only concrete and
exact opcodes can be matched. If you feel anything is missing in this
list, feel free to add it or to let me know.

Arguments
---------

arg1 and arg2 are analogous apart from the position in the assembly
instruction. If no comma is set to denote the argument condition or the
argument condition is empty, it will match any argument. In other words,
this:

will match on any two consecutive moves. If you want to specify a
condition on argument 2 but not on argument one, you can leave argument
1 empty:

Note that the last comma is always necessary because specifying an (even
empty) additional condition is mandatory.

The argument condition is by default a **Regular expression** on its
own. However, like in the opcodes, certain standard patterns have been
precompiled to match against the usual arguments of instructions. These
can be found in table [argtable].

  [argtable] Argument   meaning
  --------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  RR                    Referenced Register (i.e. [rax - 0xa] )
  DR                    Direct Register (i.e. ebx)
  CC                    Concrete Constant (i.e. 1 or 0x1234)
  PV                    (likely) Pointer Value: 0x400000 - 0x40ffff
  RC                    (likely) Random Constant: 0x9 \< x \< 0xfffffffe, but not a pointer ($^\lnot$PV)

Options
-------

Additional options are currently not implemented yet, so there’s not
much to document at this stage.

Inverting
---------

Both opcodes and arguments have an “invert” option, meaning they will
match on anything except the expression given. This is done by
prepending a capital *I* to the assembly pattern. The following example
will match any jump instruction to a location that is not a constant
(i.e. register or referenced register):

Identically, this can be used for opcodes. Adding an *I* a the beginning
of the opcode specification in the example above, will match on any
non-jump instruction. Note that this will automatically match opcodes
too that do not have any argument at that position[^1].

Regular expression operations
=============================

As this is a relatively simple regular expression matcher, not all
options are implemented with respect to regular expressions. For
example, any lookahead matching or non-matching expressions are not
implemented.

Currently, only repetitions and or statements are implemented.
Repetitions can be any range ({a,b}) where a or b can be left out to
specify there is no minimum or maximum respectively. The usual regular
expression notation is used (i.e. ?, \*, +). As mentioned before, this
matcher is lazy by default.

The OR is equally straightforward, where is will match the instruction
or subpattern before the or delimiter(“|”) first, skipping the second
half. On a failed match, it will try to match the instruction or
subpattern after the delimiter instead.

Loading a file
==============

has the capability of loading a single file containing one or more
expressions. Every pattern has to have a unique name, given in straight
brackets (’[ ]’) at the top of the pattern. Inline comments are done
with a sharp (’\#’), also commonly known as a hashtag. An example
pattern is shown in Figure [file].

``` {.bash language="bash"}

  
  [example_pattern]
  (
    <mov.lea,>*
    <mov,DR,0xa,>  # move value 10 into a register 
    <any,>{,5}
    <cmp,DR,DR,>
    <jne.je,PV,>?
  )G+
  <inc.add.,>

  [example2]
  (<SS.RR.ALU.mov.lea,>G+
  <PP,>{1,2}  # push or pop 
  ){2,}
  
```

[file]

[^1]: This was an arbitrary design decision without a particular reason
    and may be changed in the future it this simplifies our goals.
